so in today's segment we are going to
talk about
long range of tasks that form the core
of research and development in natural
language processing the simplest or
probably the most fundamental task is
called part of speech tagging before we
can understand the sentence we need to
understand what part of speech each
individual word has let's look at this
example the swimmer is getting ready to
run in the final race some of those
words have a obvious parts of speech so
for example there is clearly an article
is is clearly a verb getting is clearly
a verb as well ready is an adjective and
so on however some of the words are
ambiguous let's look at two of them the
first one is the word I run so in this
context it should be pretty obvious that
Iran is not a noun it is a verb because
it's preceded by the particle two in
other cases the word run could be
preceded by determiner such as the and
then it will be considered a now what
about the word final is it a noun or an
adjective well it's not so obvious in
this case because the final could have
been a noun but the final race looks
like final is an adjective and finally
the word race is it a verb or not wow it
could be the one in general but in this
example because of the structure of the
sentence it follows
Nariko followed by an adjective it's
much more likely to be and now so part
of speech tagging is about using rules
like these and some statistics to
understand the parts of speech of the
individual words in a sentence so if we
had his beforehand we would label run as
a noun and if we have to before run we
would label it as a verb
the next task in natural language
processing is parsing so parsing takes a
sentence as input and it produces a
syntactic representation for it so let's
look at some simple sentences in English
and later we're going to discuss
context-free grammars and parsing in
more detail here I just want to given
any intuition about parsing so in all
the sentences here we have a subject
which is Myriam and we have a verb
most entrances have a subject and a verb
the verse however here very different
the first verb here is slept which as we
know is an intransitive verb because it
doesn't take a direct object miriam
wrote the novel is an instance of a
transitive verb because of all does take
direct object medium gave sally flowers
is an example of a die transitive verb
because give takes in this case two
nouns as arguments
so give something to somebody or in this
example give somebody something so we
can have two nouns without the
preposition two in this form and then
the examples that i showed you earlier
miriam ate pizza we have different sorts
of prepositional phrases with all is
with sally which can be attached to
either the nearest noun pizza like in
the case of olives or it can be attached
to the verb ate such as with sally or
whether remorse so parsing usually deals
with either our constituent structure
often a phrase structure grammar like
the one that i'm going to describe now
or with what is known as a dependency
grammar which is something we were going
to look at in a few minutes so if a
structure grammar looks like this it has
two parts in the first part the one on
the left hand side we have holes between
norm terminals and on the right hand
side we have what is known as the
lexicon or who is about terminals or
words so let's see how to interpret the
holes on the left hand side if you want
to generate a sentence or if you want to
parse a string into a sentence we would
have to look for a noun phrase followed
by a verb phrase similarly a noun phrase
can be one of two things it can be a
determiner followed by a noun or it can
be a noun phrase followed by a
prepositional phrase so examples of
determinate now will be something like
this cat and the second one NP goes to
NP P P we will have something like this
eat pizza with olives so pizza with
olives would be a noun phrase and with
olives is the prepositional phrase the
verb can be either a vbd who
which is past tense verb it can be a
past tense verb followed by a noun
phrase that's the case for transitive
verbs it can be a past tense verb
followed by two noun phrases and it can
also have a prepositional phrase such in
the such as the case of Sally ate pizza
with pleasure so in that case with
pleasure modifies the verb pp stands for
prepositional phrase and the first tag
in the prepositional phrases the
preposition itself it's labeled PRP here
in some cases it's just PR now let's
look at the lexicon we have in this
particular grammar determiner that can
be either that or a noun that can be the
child window or car a past tense verb
which is either found or a torso and
finally we have the prepositions in off
and through so if you want to produce a
parse tree for a sentence we can build
an entire representation like this the
child showed the car through the window
what do we have here we have a sentence
that consists of a noun phrase and a
verb phrase the noun phrase is the child
the verb phrase is everything else in
the sentence the noun phrase then
consists of a determiner and a noun and
then in turn those get translated as the
words there and child the verb phrase
turns into a vbd followed by a noun
phrase and a prepositional phrase and so
on you can continue this inference
process a little bit further and fill in
all the gaps and complete the sentence
so one example of an external tool that
you can use for parsing is the
well-known stanford parser there are
many others out there but the stanford
parser comes with a very nice demo you
can go to the URL here and type in a
sentence and you will get as output a
parse tree as well as a part of speech
tag sequence of all the words in the
sentence as you can see in this example
so the output of the parsha looks like
this for example the sentence on the
left is housing starts comma the number
of new homes being built comma then
continues on the right holes 7.2% in
March to an annual rate of five hundred
forty nine thousand units comma up from
our revised five hundred twelve thousand
in February comma the Commerce
Department said you see that this
sentence is fairly complicated and yet
the parser has not polar figuring out
its internal structure let's look at
some of the special things that happen
here for example commas and other
punctuation are labeled as separate
syntactic units and separate parts of
speech we have things like adverbial
phrases like up from an advice for
having twelve thousand in february we
have our embedded clauses we have very
deep recursion and many other
interesting phenomena so when we get to
the section on parsing we will see how
parsers work and how they can build the
most likely parse given the initial
sentence now let's switch to an
interesting problem in parsing mostly
for fun
it's an octal problem known as this
problem is pretty and then two slashes
easy so what does this notation mean it
means that if you say the part of the
sentence before the two slashes the
sentence makes sense but then when you
add the last part to get a completely
different sentence that is not a
modification of the shorter sentence
it's actually means something completely
different so let's try this here if I
say this problem is pretty I'm
essentially saying that I like this
problem it's beautiful
but then if I add an extra word after
that that changes the meaning of the
sentence completely in this case pretty
modifies easy and what I'm really saying
is that the problem is easy more so it's
very easy so this kind of phenomenon in
parsing is known as a garden path
sentence and it has the following
properties there has to be a point in
the sentence where you can stop and
interpret the sentence in one way
syntactically but if you continue all
the way to the end of the sentence you
will get a very different parse tree so
this example actually was motivated by a
commercial for phone company from a few
years ago so the idea was something like
this they want to tell you that the
phones
they sarin to provide the service that
they provide is pretty reliable and
you're not going to be cut in the middle
of a sentence when you're making a phone
call so if you if this were to happen
with one of their competitors phones
what would happen is that the person
listening to the call would only hear
the beginning of the sentence and get a
very different impression of what you
were trying to say than if they had
heard the entire sentence so here's some
examples of garden path sentences don't
bother coming verses don't bother coming
early so if you get interrupted after
don't bother coming you will just not go
to that place but if you had heard the
full sentence you would hear don't
bother coming early which means you
should still come just come on time
here's some other friendly examples take
the turkey out of the oven at five so
this is an order like instructions that
you give to somebody who's at your home
so if they hear only this part they're
going to take the turkey out at five but
what you really meant was take the
turkey out of the oven at five to four
which is a very different thing so if
they wait until five o'clock chances are
that it will be overcooked here's
another one I got canned this is
something that you don't want to hear
over the phone but maybe the full
sentence was I got canned peaches for
dinner
so clearly the two sentences have very
different syntactic structures and very
different semantic interpretations a few
more examples
Oh Americans need to buy a house okay
maybe yes maybe no but that's not what
was really intended what was intended is
all Americans need to buy a house is a
lot of money so you can build the parse
trees for those two sentences and
realize that they're very different and
can you think of any other such example
so this was essentially the topic of
this Nakhla problem that I have in the
subject line of this slide so the
solutions are available on the web on
the Nakhla site and there's a lot of
examples there however I want to
emphasize the criteria that we'll use to
judge them and the criteria are the
following the part before the two
slashes should be a complete sentence
the
full sentence has a different meaning
than the part before the slashes and the
part before the slashes should not
already be ambiguous so if those
criteria are met then you get a good
solution to this problem so the other
kind of parsing that is very common
these days is called dependency parsing
so in dependency parsing we're not so
much interested in s and noun phrases
and verb phrases we're interested in the
relationships between words in the
sentence without any explicit
constituent structure so visit for
example is shown here this sentence is
many likes yellow apples so the
dependency in the presentation is shown
here it's always in the form of a tree
and it is hooted at the predicate of the
sentence so the most important word in
the sentence is considered to be the
main verb in this case likes that's why
we have it on the top of the slide now
in the sentence Mary likes yellow apples
we have two words that are arguments of
the verb likes for there to be a liking
event there has to be somebody who does
the liking and somebody who
quote/unquote receives the liking or is
the recipient of the liking so those two
slots and the sentence are filled by
Mary and apples Mary is the licker and
apples is the quote/unquote liked this
is the terminology that is used in
linguistics and finally we still have
one more word left to represent that is
yellow yellow does not modify likes does
not modify Mary the only thing that it
modifies is Apple's therefore we draw it
as part of the dependency tree as a
child node of Apple's so in dependency
parsing we start with a sentence and we
produce a dependency structure as the
output and this is something that came
come in very handy for here's an example
from a paper on biological natural
language processing in this case a
sentence was converted into a dependency
tree and then some rules were used on
the dependency tree to determine whether
there was an interaction between any two
particular proteins in that sentence and
again the dependency structure was
what made it possible to understand how
those proteins are related so let's look
now at the sample output of a dependency
parser as you can see every line here
connects two words the words are
numbered from 1 to I guess 36 which is
the last word in the sentence if you
look at the pairs of numbers in each
dependency you will see that you can
reconstruct the entire dependency
structure of the sentence you just need
to look for a number that only appears
once that would be the root of the
sentence and then all the children nodes
of that node would be the second-tier
nodes and then recursively you can build
the entire dependency tree and I would
like to figure out this entire tree as a
homework so this concludes the first
part of the section on NOP tasks that
included morphology part of speech
tagging and parsing we're going to
continue later with some additional NOP
tasks